History of the Scuola Grande di San Marco
The Scuola Grande di San Marco was founded in 1260 at the church of Santa Croce in Venice. Like other penitential societies, the institution rose to a position of political power at the beginning of the Renaissance. By 1421 their meeting house, which consisted of a two story structure with an ample sala on the piano nobile (or main floor) as well as rooms on the ground floor, was deemed inadequate for the growing importance of the institution.  In 1437, the Council of Ten approved the lease of a new tract of land on the insula of S.S. Giovanni e Paolo and construction on the new house began that same year.  On the feast of San Marco 1438, the scuola transferred services to its new home.  
The move was short-lived. Less than fifty years later, on April 1, 1485, the new meeting house was destroyed by fire. Malipiero describes the event in his Annali: 
“On the evening of Holy Thursday, the fradelli of the Scuola di San Marco, gathering in their hall to go to Sant’Antonio, left [the hall] but also left alight the candles on the altar; and the wind blew open one of the windows on the west side, such that its curtain passed over the candles and was set ablaze; and it burned the altar and the roof above, so that within four hours all was burned; and it was but a little way from also setting afire the church of San Zuan Polo; and later, with the aid of the Signoria and the fratelli it was rebuilt greater than it had been before…” (Malipiero, ‘Annali’, in Archivio storico italiano, ed. A Sagredo, parts 1 and 2 (1843-4), p. 675. Translated by Richard J. Goy in Building Renaissance Venice: Patrons, Architects and Builders, p. 193). 

The following summer, the scuola decided not only to re-build in the same location but to enlarge its meeting house. In 1487, they entered negotiations with the adjacent church and convent for the acquisition of additional land and by 1489 work was progressing simultaneously on both the interior and exterior of the new meeting house. On November 18, sculptors and architects Pietro Lombardi and Giovanni Buora were commissioned to design the scuola’s façade—facing the campo. The super-structure and its lower exterior decoration were finished by the following year, when architect Mauro Codussi was appointed the proto of the project. Continuing the work of Lombardi and Buora, Codussi saw the façade to completion in 1495 (with the exception of the Marcian lion and the flanking sculptures). Interior decoration would continue in the following years but, by 1495, the Scuola Grande di San Marco had achieved its final form.
	The Scuola Grande di San Marco would remain active at this site until the 18th century, when Napolean’s forces invaded Venice. Following the suppression of the scuole in 1806, the Scuola Grande di San Marco’s meeting house was converted into a military hospital. In 1819, administration of the facility was transferred to the civil authorities. Today, the Scuola remains the entrance to Venice’s largest civic hospital.

What is a scuola grande?
Venice’s scuole grandi were religious and charitable organizations founded by laymen for the purpose of pious devotion. The first scuole appeared as early as the 13th century and took a variety of forms, for example artisanal organizations, support networks for immigrant communities, and penitential societies. By the early Renaissance, these groups were consolidated by the Venetian Republic’s Council of Ten and their administrative statutes re-defined. During this period, the former penitential societies rose to a position of political power and prestige. These became the scuole grandi.
Similar to confraternities and trade guilds, the scuole grandi provided their members with certain basic services—assistance in times of hardship, dowries for their daughters, and burial rites. Members were required to be Venetian citizens but, unlike guilds, they held diverse occupations. Consistent with their penitential origins, the scuole grandi maintained a calendar of religious offices in honor of their patron saints but their primary activity was charitable works. These included supplying the poor with food, clothing, and proper burials. They also oversaw the administrations of hospitals.
The scuole were active in Venetian society until 1806-1807 when, like other religious organizations, they were suppressed by the Napoleonic reforms. Their houses, used for the assembly of members and the distribution of charity, were re-fitted for military service as hospitals, etc. Designed and decorated by the most prominent architects and artists in Venice, many of these structures have endured to the present day and continue to exert a commanding presence in the urban landscape. There are also four scuole which, after being reconstituted in the nineteenth century, continue to accept members today — the Scuola Grande dei Carmini, di San Giovanni Evangelista, di San Rocco, and di San Teodoro.

Scuola Grande di San Marco
Scuola Grande di San Rocco
Scuola Grande della Carità
Scuola Grande di San Giovanni Evangelista
Scuola Grande della Misericordia
Scuola Grande di San Teodoro
Scuola Grande dei Carmini
